The application link is [here](https://apply.interfolio.com/148956).

The Department of Computer Science at Williams College invites applications for two tenure-track faculty positions, one at the assistant professor level and one open-rank, beginning July 1, 2025. The Assistant Professor position is a tenure-track position.  The rank and initial term of the open-rank position will be determined by the qualifications of the successful candidate.  We welcome candidates from all areas of computer science who can contribute to the vibrancy of our academic community through their research, teaching, and service for both positions.  Williams College is committed to fostering a diverse and inclusive academic community.  We strongly encourage candidates from under-represented identities, including women, people of color, LGBTQ individuals, and others who will contribute to the diversification and enrichment of ideas and perspectives, to apply.

Successful candidates will join the department's thirteen current faculty in supporting a thriving undergraduate computer science major at a top-tier liberal arts college.  Candidates should have a commitment to excellence in teaching and research, and should, by September 2025, possess a Ph.D. in computer science or a closely related discipline. The teaching load typically consists of three semester-long courses per year, with associated labs, spread over the fall and spring semesters. 

The Department of Computer Science offers a congenial working environment, an excellent and diverse student body, and state-of-the-art facilities supporting both teaching and research. Many opportunities exist for collaboration both within computer science and across disciplines. Williams offers faculty participation in the college’s professional development program [First3](https://faculty-networks.williams.edu/first3/) and in various programs offered by [NCFDD](https://faculty.williams.edu/articles/ncfdd-org-home/), and support through the [Rice Center for Teaching](https://www.williams.edu/teaching-center/). 

Applications should include a cover letter, curriculum vitae, and teaching and research statements. The application materials should also address how the candidate’s teaching, scholarship, mentorship and/or service activities would support a student population that is broadly diverse with regard to gender, race, ethnicity, nationality, sexual orientation, and religion.  Candidates who advance in the pool will be asked to provide three letters of reference.  Application materials must be submitted electronically through [Interfolio](https://apply.interfolio.com/148956). Materials may be addressed to Professor Jeannie Albrecht, Chair, Department of Computer Science.

Completed applications received by November 8, 2024, will receive full consideration, and review of applications will continue until the position is filled. The search committee plans to conduct video conference interviews with semi-finalists in November and December, followed by on-campus interviews with finalists in December and January. Please direct all correspondence to cshiring@williams.edu. All offers of employment are contingent upon completion of a background check as described [here](https://faculty.williams.edu/prospective-faculty/background-check-policy/). 

Williams College is a liberal arts institution located in the Berkshire Hills of western Massachusetts. The college has built its reputation on outstanding teaching and scholarship and on the academic excellence of its approximately 2,000 students. Please visit the Williams College [website](http://www.williams.edu). Beyond meeting fully its legal obligations for non-discrimination, Williams College is committed to building a diverse and inclusive community where members from all backgrounds can live, learn, and thrive.

**Equal Employment Opportunity Statement:** Williams College is a liberal arts institution located in the Berkshire Hills of western Massachusetts. The college has built its reputation on outstanding teaching and scholarship and on the academic excellence of its approximately 2,000 students. Beyond meeting fully its legal obligations for non-discrimination, Williams College is committed to building a diverse and inclusive community where members from all backgrounds can live, learn, and thrive.